# Learning-Artistic-Signatures
Learning Artistic Signatures: Symmetry Discovery and Artistic Style

Despite nearly a decade of literature on style transfer, there is no undisputed definition of artistic style. State-of-the-art models produce  impressive results by transforming one image's content according to the visual characteristics of another, but they are difficult to interpret and evaluate. Without a coherent definition of style, the problem of style transfer is inherently ill-posed. Early work in the area provided an interpretable optimization problem but treated style as a measure only of texture. This was a major limitation since it is not possible to capture the style of an image by looking at texture alone. This led to artifacts in the outputs of style-transfer models where content features from the style image sometimes bled into the output image. Conversely, more recent work with diffusion models offers compelling empirical results but provides little theoretical grounding. These models implicitly learn associations between content and style from vast image distributions but sometimes prioritize matching the distributional characteristics of the style images over preserving the integrity of the content image. In this work, we propose an alternative definition of artistic style that combines both textural qualities and global feature arrangement. In particular, we suggest that artistic style should be thought of as a set of global symmetries that dictate the arrangement of local features. We then validate this perspective empirically by learning the symmetry generators of a large dataset of paintings and showing that symmetries are predictive of the artistic movement to which the painting belongs. Distances between subspaces formed by Lie generators of symmetry groups reveal stylistic similarities between artists that align with art historical consensus. Finally, we show that by considering both local and global features—by using both Lie generators and traditional textural measures like Gram matrices—we can quantitatively capture the stylistic similarity between artists. This approach not only aligns well with art historians' consensus but also offers a robust framework for distinguishing nuanced stylistic differences, allowing for a more interpretable, theoretically grounded approach to style transfer.
